What can travelers do to prevent malaria?

taking pills
Travelers can protect themselves from malaria by taking prescription medicine and preventing mosquito bites.

Take prescription medicine if recommended for your destination:

Talk to your doctor about which medicine is best for you.
There are prescription medicines you can take to prevent malaria.
Take this medicine before, during, and after your trip.
Prevent mosquito bites:

man spraying insect repellent on his arm
Cover exposed skin by wearing long-sleeved shirts, long pants, and hats.
Use an appropriate insect repellent as directed.
Higher percentages of active ingredient provide longer protection. Use products with the following active ingredients:
DEET (Products containing DEET include Off!, Cutter, Sawyer, and Ultrathon)
Picaridin (also known as KBR 3023, Bayrepel, and icaridin products containing picaridin include Cutter Advanced, Skin So Soft Bug Guard Plus, and Autan [outside the US])
Oil of lemon eucalyptus (OLE) or PMD (Products containing OLE include Repel and Off! Botanicals)
IR3535  (Products containing IR3535 include Skin So Soft Bug Guard Plus Expedition and SkinSmart)
Always follow product directions and reapply as directed:
If you are also using sunscreen, apply sunscreen first and insect repellent second.
Follow package directions when applying repellent on children. Avoid applying repellent to their hands, eyes, and mouth.
Use permethrin-treated clothing and gear (such as boots, pants, socks, and tents). You can buy pre-treated clothing and gear or treat them yourself:
Treated clothing remains protective after multiple washings. See the product information to find out how long the protection will last.
If treating items yourself, follow the product instructions carefully.
Do not use permethrin directly on skin.
Stay and sleep in screened or air conditioned rooms.
Use a bed net if the area where you are sleeping is exposed to the outdoors.
If you are bitten by mosquitoes:

Avoid scratching mosquito bites.
Apply hydrocortisone cream or calamine lotion to reduce itching.