Control and Prevention
CDC Logo
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) provides additional guidance and recommendations for preventing worker exposure to Ebola, including for healthcare workers and others at increased risk for exposure.

Currently, most workers in the U.S. are unlikely to encounter Ebola virus or individuals with Ebola Hemorrhagic Fever (EHF). However, exposure to the virus or someone with EHF may be more likely in certain sectors, including the healthcare, mortuary/death care, and airline servicing industries. Workers who interact with people, animals, goods, and equipment arriving in the U.S. from foreign countries with current EHF outbreaks are at the greatest risk for exposure.

Precautionary measures for preventing exposure to the Ebola virus depend on the type of work, potential for Ebola-virus contamination of the work environment, and what is known about other potential exposure hazards. Infection control strategies may have to be modified to include additional selections of personal protective equipment (PPE), administrative controls, and/or safe work practices. OSHA has developed interim guidance to help prevent worker exposure to Ebola virus and individuals with EHF.

Interim general guidance for workers

The following are OSHA’s requirements and recommendations for protecting workers whose work activities are conducted in an environment that is known or reasonably suspected to be contaminated with Ebola virus (e.g., due to contamination with blood or other potentially infectious material). These general guidelines are not intended to cover workers who have direct contact with individuals with EHF.

Employers should follow recognized and generally accepted good infection control practices, and must comply with applicable requirements in the Bloodborne Pathogens (29 CFR 1910.134), Personal Protective Equipment (29 CFR 1910.132), general requirements) and the Respiratory Protection (29 CFR 1910.134) standards, among other OSHA requirements.
Use proper personal protective equipment (PPE). OSHA's new "PPE Selection Matrix for Occupational Exposure to Ebola Virus" (PDF*), provides task-based guidance to help employers select appropriate PPE for workers who may be exposed to Ebola virus in a number of higher-risk work settings.
Practice good hand hygiene protocols to avoid exposure to infected blood and body fluids, contaminated objects, or other contaminated environmental surfaces.
Workers who may be splashed, sprayed, or spattered with blood or body fluids from environmental surfaces where Ebola virus contamination is possible must wear face and eye protection, such as a full-face shield or surgical masks with goggles. Aprons or other fluid-resistant protective clothing must also be worn in these situations to prevent the worker's clothes from being soiled with infectious material.
Workers tasked with cleaning surfaces that may be contaminated with Ebola virus must be protected from exposure. Employers are responsible for ensuring that workers are protected from exposure to Ebola and that workers are not exposed to harmful levels of chemicals used for cleaning and disinfection. OSHA’s Cleaning and Decontamination of Ebola on Surfaces (PDF*) (Spanish (PDF*)) Fact Sheet provides guidance on protecting workers in non-healthcare/non-laboratory settings from exposure to Ebola and cleaning and disinfection chemicals. CDC also offers specific guidance for workers cleaning and disinfecting surfaces that have been in contact with blood or body fluids from a traveler known to have or suspected of having EHF.
Workers involved in handling, treatment, transport, and disposal of medical, laboratory and other waste must be protected from exposure to infectious agents, including Ebola virus, which causes Ebola virus disease. Contaminated waste may pose a greater risk to workers if it is not handled safely or packaged, treated, and disposed of properly. The new fact sheet, Safe Handling, Treatment, Transport, and Disposal of Ebola-Contaminated Waste (PDF*), was developed jointly with the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to help employers take the necessary steps to protect workers whose jobs involve tasks throughout the waste cycle, from the point of waste generation through final disposition of treated waste products.
Healthcare workers and responders involved with cases related to Ebola in the United States may be required to work extended, rotating, consecutive, or otherwise unusual shifts. They also need enhanced personal protective equipment (PPE) when working with Ebola patients or in Ebola-contaminated areas. These conditions increase the risk of injuries and accidents and can contribute to poor health and worker fatigue. The NIOSH/OSHA "Preventing Worker Fatigue Among Ebola Healthcare Workers and Responders" (PDF) document provides guidance for protecting workers responding in the United States, but the same concepts apply to those working in other countries.
Employers must train workers about the sources of Ebola exposure and appropriate precautions. Employers must train workers required to use PPE on what equipment is necessary, when and how they must use it, and how to dispose of the equipment. In addition where workers are exposed to blood or other potentially infectious materials, employers must provide the training required by the Bloodborne Pathogens standard (29 CFR 1910.134), including information about how to recognize tasks that may involve exposure and the methods to reduce exposure, including engineering controls, work practices, and personal protective equipment.
OSHA's "Protecting Workers during a Pandemic" (PDF*) Fact Sheet provides general guidance about principles of worker protection that may be useful during a wide-spread disease outbreak.

NIOSH Ebola page also provides guidance for protecting workers.

Specific information for workers (by job type)