What is Hepatitis B?
Hepatitis B is a contagious liver infection caused by the hepatitis B virus (HBV).  The natural course of hepatitis B disease is different from one person to another.
 
The first phase of disease, during the first 6 months after a person becomes infected, is called acute hepatitis B infection. During this phase, many people show no symptoms at all. Among those who do have symptoms, the illness is usually mild and most people don't recognize that they have liver disease.
In 90% of persons who become infected as adults with hepatitis B, the immune system successfully fights off the infection during the acute phase -- the virus is cleared from the body within 6 months, the liver heals completely, and the person becomes immune to hepatitis B infection for the rest of their life. In the other 10%, the immune system cannot clear the virus and hepatitis B infection persists past 6 months, usually for the rest of the person's life. This persistent state is known as chronic hepatitis B infection.
When babies become infected at birth or during infancy, the percentages are reversed -- only 10% clear the infection. The remaining 90% develop chronic hepatitis B infection.
In chronic hepatitis B infection, the liver becomes inflamed and scarred over a period of years. However, the speed at which inflammation and scarring take place varies between people. Some develop severe liver scarring (cirrhosis) within 20 years. In others, liver disease progresses slowly and does not become a major problem during their lifetime.
Another concern is the potential for liver cancer. Hepatitis B infection is the single most important cause of hepatocellular (liver) cancer.

Treatment with anti-viral drugs works for some people with HBV who are starting to develop liver damage. Whether treatment will be successful depends on many factors, and these are best discussed with a physician who specializes in liver diseases. When treatment is successful, liver scarring and the potential for liver cancer are reduced.