C. Product Retrieval and Quarantine, and Notification of Consignees of Blood and Blood Components 
We recommend that you take the following actions if you determine that blood or blood components have been collected from a donor who should have been deferred according to the recommendations in section IV.B of this guidance.

If you collected cellular blood components intended for transfusion or for further manufacturing from a donor who should have been deferred according to the recommendations in section IV.B. of this guidance, we recommend that you quarantine any undistributed in-date cellular blood components collected from that donor.
If you distributed cellular blood components intended for transfusion or for further manufacturing collected from a donor with a clinical history of malaria who should have been deferred according to the recommendation in section IV.B.1. of this guidance, we recommend that you notify consignees to retrieve and quarantine the in-date cellular blood components collected from that donor.
Additionally, in this situation, if cellular blood components have been transfused, you should encourage consignees to notify the transfusion recipient’s physician of record regarding the need for monitoring of the recipient for a possible malaria infection for a period of 3 months post-transfusion.
 
If you distributed cellular blood components intended for transfusion collected from a donor who should have been deferred for malaria-risk associated with travel or prior residence according to recommendations in sections IV.B.2 or 3 of this guidance, we recommend that you notify consignees to retrieve and quarantine the in-date cellular blood components collected from that donor.
 
If you collected acellular blood components (i.e., frozen plasma products) intended for transfusion or for further manufacturing from a donor who should have been deferred according to the recommendations in section IV.B. of this guidance, we recommend that you quarantine any undistributed in-date acellular blood components collected from that donor.  (Note that based on the very low risk for transmission of malaria, we are not recommending notification of consignees if you distributed such acellular products.)