 © 2004 page 1 of 3
Typhus Fever –
Rickettsia 
prowazekii 
Epidemic Typhus, 
Louse-Borne Typhus Fever, 
Typhus Exanthematicus, 
Classical Typhus Fever, 
European Typhus, 
Brill-Zinsser Disease, 
Jail Fever 
 
Last Updated: January 2004 
 
 
 
 
 
Etiology 
Epidemic typhus results from infection by Rickettsia prowazekii, a Gram 
negative, obligate intracellular bacterium. At least two strains can be distinguished by 
genetic analysis. One strain is found only in humans; the other also occurs in flying 
squirrels in the United States. 
Geographic Distribution 
R. prowazekii has been found worldwide. Foci of disease currently exist in many 
countries in Asia, central and east Africa, and the mountainous regions of Mexico, 
Central and South America. War and famine can result in explosive outbreaks of 
disease. 
In the United States, R. prowazekii is endemic in flying squirrels. This form is 
zoonotic; sporadic human cases have been seen in Georgia, Virginia, West Virginia, 
North Carolina, Tennessee, Indiana, Illinois, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Maryland, 
Massachusetts, New Jersey, New York, and California. 
Transmission 
Transmission of epidemic typhus occurs by arthropod vectors. The primary 
vector in person–to–person transmission is the human body louse (Pediculus humanus 
corporis). Lice become infected when they feed on the blood of infected patients; the 
lice defecate when they feed on a new host, excreting R. prowazekii in the feces. 
Transmission occurs when organisms in the louse feces or crushed lice are rubbed 
into the bite wound or other breaks in the skin. The rickettsia are also infectious by 
inhalation or contact with the mucous membranes of the mouth and eyes. In most 
parts of the world, humans are the only reservoir host for R. prowazekii. Infections 
can become latent and later recrudesce; humans with recrudescent typhus are capable 
of infecting lice and spreading the disease. 
In the United States, flying squirrels also serve as a reservoir host. Infections are 
spread between squirrels by squirrel lice (Neohaematopinus scuiropteri), particularly 
during the winter when populations are concentrated in nests. N. scuiropteri does not 
feed on humans, but squirrel fleas (Orchopeas howardi) and other mammalian fleas 
are susceptible and may be important in spreading the disease to humans. Inhalation 
of organisms in infected louse feces or contact with squirrels may also be routes of 
transmission. 
Lice infected with R. prowazekii excrete organisms in the feces after 2 to 6 days 
and die prematurely within 2 weeks. Bacteria can survive in the feces and the dead 
lice for weeks. 
Disinfection 
R. prowazekii is susceptible to 1% sodium hypochlorite, 70% ethanol, 
glutaraldehyde, and formaldehyde. It can also be inactivated by moist heat (121° C 
for a minimum of 15 min) and dry heat (160–170° C for a minimum of an hour). 
Infections in Humans 
Incubation Period 
The incubation period is 1 to 2 weeks; most infections become evident after 12 
days. 
Clinical Signs 
The onset of epidemic typhus is often sudden. The initial symptoms may include 
headache, chills, fever, prostration and myalgia. In approximately 50% of cases, a 
rash develops after 4 to 6 days. Small pink macules usually appear first on the upper 
trunk or axillae then spread to the entire body with the exception of the face, palms 
and soles. As the disease progresses, the rash usually becomes dark and 
maculopapular or, in severe cases, petechial and hemorrhagic. Splenomegaly, 
hypotension, nausea, vomiting and confusion may also be seen. The fever lasts 
approximately 2 weeks. In seriously ill with gangrene, and symptoms of 
 Typhus Fever – Rickettsia prowazekii
Last Updated: January 2004 © 2004 page 2 of 3
encephalitis or pneumonia may occur. Children and people 
with partial immunity can have a mild infection with no 
rash. 
R. prowazekii sometimes remains latent and 
recrudesces years later; this form is called Brill–Zinsser 
disease. Recrudescent typhus is usually mild, with lower 
mortality rates. 
The symptoms of the zoonotic form resemble classic 
typhus but are almost always mild. The fever usually lasts 
for 7 to 10 days and the rash is often barely visible or 
absent. Deaths are not seen with this form. 
Communicability 
R. prowazekii is not transmitted from person to person. 
Patients can infect lice while the fever is present and may 
continue to be infectious for another 2 to 3 days. Patients 
with Brill–Zinsser disease are also infectious for lice. 
Diagnostic Tests 
Epidemic typhus is usually diagnosed by serology; a 
fourfold rise in titer is diagnostic. Titers usually become 
detectable during the second week. Serologic tests include 
the indirect fluorescence antibody test, latex agglutination, 
complement fixation, enzyme immunoassay (EIA) and the 
toxin–neutralization test. R. prowazekii may cross–react 
with R. typhi (the agent of murine typhus) in some tests. 
Organisms can also be identified in tissue samples, 
including skin biopsies, by immunohistochemical staining. 
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays may be available 
in some laboratories. Isolation and identification of R. 
prowazekii is not widely available or used for diagnosis, as 
rickettsia are both fastidious and dangerous to laboratory 
personnel. 
Treatment and Vaccination 
Early treatment with antibiotics is effective and 
relapses are uncommon. Treatment is sometimes begun 
before laboratory confirmation, particularly when the 
symptoms are severe. Antibiotics can also speed recovery 
in patients with the zoonotic form. No commercial vaccines 
have been licensed, but experimental vaccines are produced 
by military sources in the United States and may be 
available for high–risk situations. 
Residual insecticide treatment of the clothing and hair 
is recommended for people who may have been exposed to 
infected lice. 
Morbidity and Mortality 
Epidemics of typhus usually occur where louse 
populations are high. Infections are typically seen in 
populations living in unsanitary, crowded conditions; 
outbreaks are often associated with wars, famines, floods, 
and other disasters. Most epidemics occur during the colder 
months. Sporadic cases of zoonotic typhus are seen in the 
United States. 
The overall case fatality rate for untreated infections is 
10 to 40%; the mortality rate increases with age. Infections 
are rarely fatal in children less than 10 years old; in people 
over 50 years old, the mortality rate can be as high as 60% 
without treatment. Deaths have not been seen in the 
zoonotic form, regardless of treatment. 
Infections in Animals 
In the United States, R. prowazekii is endemic in flying 
squirrels (Glaucomys volans). Infections can be transmitted 
to humans from this species but little has been published 
about the disease in squirrels. Dogs have been 
experimentally infected but seroconverted with no clinical 
signs; no organisms were recovered from the blood. 
Internet Resources 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) 
http://www.cdc.gov/travel/diseases/typhus.htm 
Epidemic Typhus Associated with Flying Squirrels– United 
States - Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/00001
177.htm 
Material Safety Data Sheets – Canadian Laboratory Center 
for Disease Control 
http://www.hc–sc.gc.ca/pphb–dgspsp/msds–
ftss/index.html#menu 
Medical Microbiology 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK7627 
Rickettsial Pathogens and their Arthropod Vectors 
Emerging Infectious Diseases 
http://www.cfsresearch.org/rickettsia/other/9nf.htm 
The Merck Manual 
http://www.merck.com/pubs/mmanual/ 
Surveillance and Reporting Guidelines for Typhus 
Washington State Department of Health 
http://www.doh.wa.gov/notify/guidelines/typhus.htm 
Typhus and Flying Squirrels - Southeastern Cooperative 
Wildlife Disease Study (SCWDS) Briefs 
http://www.uga.edu/scwds/topic_index/1999/Typhusan
dFlyingSquirrels.pdf 
References 
Azad A.F. and C.B. Beard. “Rickettsial pathogens and their 
arthropod vectors.” Emerging Infectious Diseases 4, no. 2 
(Apr–Jun 1998). 4 Dec 2002. 
http://www.cfsresearch.org/rickettsia/other/9nf.htm. 
Breitschwerdt E.B., B.C. Hegarty, M. G. Davidson and N.S.A. 
Szabados. “Evaluation of the pathogenic potential of 
Rickettsia canada and Rickettsia prowazekii organisms in 
dogs.” J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 207, no. 1 (Jul 1995):58–63. Typhus Fever – Rickettsia prowazekii
Last Updated: January 2004 © 2004 page 3 of 3
“Epidemic typhus.” In The Merck Manual, 17th ed. Edited by 
M.H. Beers and R. Berkow. Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck 
and Co., 1999. 4 Dec 2002. 
http://www.merck.com/pubs/mmanual/section13/chapter159/1
59b.htm. 
“Epidemic typhus associated with flying squirrels –– United States.” 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 31, no. 41 (Oct 22, 
1982): 555–6;561. 4 Dec 2002. 
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/00001177.htm. 
Huffman J. and V. Nettles. “Typhus and flying squirrels.” 
Southeastern Cooperative Wildlife Disease Study (SCWDS) 
Briefs, October 1999, 15.3. 3 December 2002. 
http://www.uga.edu/scwds/topic_index/1999/TyphusandFlyin
gSquirrels.pdf. 
“Material Safety Data Sheet – Rickettsia prowazekii.” January 
2001 Canadian Laboratory Centre for Disease Control. 4 Dec 
2002. http://www.hc–sc.gc.ca/pphb–dgspsp/msds–
ftss/msds128e.html. 
“Surveillance and reporting guidelines for typhus.” Washington 
State Department of Health, Oct 2002. 4 December 2002. 
http://www.doh.wa.gov/notify/guidelines/typhus.htm. 
“Typhus Fevers.” Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Feb 
2002. 4 December 2002. 
http://www.cdc.gov/travel/diseases/typhus.htm. 
Walker, D.H. “Rickettsiae.” In Medical Microbiology. 4th ed. 
Edited by Samuel Baron. New York; Churchill Livingstone, 
1996. 4 Dec 2002. 
http://www.gsbs.utmb.edu/microbook/ch038.htm. 
 