Between 1837 and 1841, the New South Wales colonial government quarantined fifteen British and Irish ships, all for typhus. The article argues that the voyage destabilised the medical identity of fevers in general and typhus in particular. Yet, the political significance of the disease travelled intact, and fed directly into broader contemporary political debates in the Australian colonies about poverty, immigration and their political relationship with Britain. These quarantines provided a platform for colonists and immigrants to contest the causes and significance of the disease. Historiographically, the article contributes to debates about quarantine, politics and immigration. By emphasising the importance of the voyage as a pathological event, it contributes to our understanding of the role of time and distance in the spread of disease and disease knowledge in the nineteenth century.

Key words
Quarantine fever typhus migration Australia
Previous Section
Next Section
On 4 November 1836, the Lady MacNaghten sailed from Cork with 412 immigrants.1 The ship's company largely consisted of families selected by the British government's Emigration Committee. The surgeon's journal portrayed a constant battle with fevers, measles, dysentery and whooping cough during the three-month voyage. He lamented that so many families and young children, apparently entirely unsuitable as settlers, had been allowed to embark on such a long voyage with few spare clothes and inadequate quantities of medical comforts.2 By the time the Lady MacNaghten sailed into Sydney Harbour on 26 February 1837, ten adults and 44 children had died.3 The ship's surgeon was dangerously ill, and the Colonial Assistant Surgeon reported that 90 persons on the Lady MacNaghten were sick; seventy ‘in a state of total helplessness’, the others ‘weakly convalescent’ with a contagious fever.4 A cabin passenger confirmed that ‘a change had taken place in the disease from the 1st January to our arrival here and that Typhus fever became prevalent’.5

The Sydney newspapers reacted immediately to the arrival of the Lady MacNaghten. On 27 February, the Sydney Morning Herald declared the arrival of a ‘fever ship’. It hoped ‘that the strictest attention will be paid to the quarantine regulations to prevent so dreadful a malady spreading to Sydney’.6 The Sydney Monitor was more sympathetic, but also condemned the ‘deplorable state’ of the ‘ill-fated’ passengers of the Lady MacNaghten.7 The following day, the Colonial Secretary ordered that the ship be quarantined; immigrants who remained ‘immediately free of disease’ would land and lodge in tents and sheds on shore, ‘leaving all those who are really infected’ on the Lady MacNaghten, which would become a hospital ship.8 The Colonial Secretary employed an experienced naval surgeon at the Quarantine Station, while Dr Bowler, the Governor's surgeon, remained with the sick, having joined the ship before it entered the harbour.9 The Government Gazette publicly announced the quarantine on 1 March, which lasted for 45 days.10

The diagnosis of typhus on immigrant ships such as the Lady MacNaghten was instrumental in prompting the establishment of a permanent quarantine station at the entrance to Sydney harbour. Between 1837 and 1841, a further fourteen British emigrant ships performed quarantine, all for fever, representing about one in ten ships.11 But, these early Australian quarantines deserve further historical analysis, The Australian colonies embraced quarantine just as European governments began to abandon it. As Alison Bashford has shown, quarantine played a key role in Australian ideas about nationhood well into the twentieth century.12 Secondly, compared to diseases such as cholera, smallpox and yellow fever, typhus plays a minor role in the history of modern quarantine.13 Why did typhus become so important at this juncture?

The medical rationale for adopting a quarantine system seems clear; diseases that were common in Britain—including typhus, and measles—remained rare or absent in the Australian colonies, and these diseases could only arrive by ship.14 Yet this article starts from the observation that after 1828 the New South Wales Governor ordered quarantine exclusively against immigrant, rather than convict ships, even though the 1830s was also one of the busiest decades of convict transportation. There is no striking medical difference that suggests this divergent policy: dysentery, ophthalmia, catarrh, obstipatio, erysipelas, consumption and fevers dominate emigrant and convict surgeons' journals. The government chartered the same vessels for emigrants as for convicts. The Lady MacNaghten, for example, sailed to New South Wales with convicts in 1835, before repeating the voyage with emigrants in 1837. Convicts and emigrants sailed the same route, encountered the same maritime environments, and were accompanied by the same naval surgeons with comparable authority and instructions.15

However, this was a period of intense debate in New South Wales about immigration, settler relations with indigenous people, and the transition from penal to free society.16 The British government had introduced the first formal schemes of government-assisted emigration, financed by colonial land sale, in 1831. Colonial Office sub-agencies such as the London Emigration Committee superintended this recruitment and chartered ships to sail to Australia. Although colonial legislature specified the criteria for eligibility, in 1834 the Poor Law Amendment Act also enabled parishes to assist the poor to emigrate. Colonists vociferously objected to the arrival, between 1832 and 1835, of boatloads of single women taken from institutions for destitute women.17 Influential colonists such as John Dunmore Lang, clergyman, politician and recruiter, increasingly complained that their money funded the immigration of ineligible British paupers. They directed their ire towards the British Emigration Committees, and John Marshall, a ship-owner contractor and agent who dominated early assisted emigration. These attacks, Haines argues, expressed ‘tense colonial reactions to imperial policy in an era when the home government was resisting demands from Sydney for self-determination’.18 Letters frequently appeared in colonial newspapers, as well as The Times, as colonists increasingly voiced their opinions on immigration and eligibility.19

From 1836, two new schemes of emigration operated. Under the government system, in which naval surgeons selected emigrants, the Colonial Office chartered ships and provided free passage for emigrants. Under the bounty system the colonists specified, and paid for, the labourers they required. In both cases, emigrants had to fulfil criteria for eligibility. However, under the bounty system, colonists gained greater control over who they assisted because the receiving immigration officer could refuse to pay the bounty for immigrants he considered unfit on their arrival. While the immigrant was not refused entry, the ship-owner (rather than the colonists) bore the cost of their passage to Australia.20 Between 1836 and 1840, 28,985 immigrants arrived in New South Wales from Britain, of which 22,642 (85 per cent) were assisted by these schemes. Immigration tripled transportation in 1839 and, by 1840, immigrants outnumbered convict arrivals by four to one.21 The colonial government's construction of a formal quarantine system with a permanent Health Officer coincided exactly with this period. The Lady MacNaghten and its feverish company encountered a colonial society that was, as one historian has put it, decidedly ‘prickly’.22

This article begins by outlining contemporary ideas about fevers and their relationship to typhus. Secondly, it analyses how surgeons constructed disease aetiologies when they identified that ships arrived in New South Wales with ‘contagious’ fever, or typhus. It argues that complex understandings of disease causation, as well as the apparent ability of fevers to change form and become typhus enabled surgeons to impose, justify or criticise quarantine, and to allocate blame. How and when surgeons diagnosed ‘contagious’ or ‘typhus’ fevers at specific points during the time and space of the voyage was significant, for the practical performance of quarantine, for their own professional positions, and for the immigrants' reception in the colony.

Quarantine had two further consequences: it identified immigrants with a value-laden contagious disease and provided a locus for the public scrutiny of the immigrant's moment of arrival. In the third section, I show how debates about medical diagnoses and contagion extended beyond the quarantine station to inform contemporary colonial discourses about poverty, immigration and eligibility in 1830s Sydney. Engaging with Bashford's emphasis on the spatial rigidity of quarantine as ‘an over-disciplined no-man's land’, I suggest that newspapers instead traversed a decidedly porous rhetorical boundary.23 A new system of formal quarantine helped legitimise settler discourses of worth and eligibility. However, the aim of this article is not to reify colonists' opinions, but to show how. Immigrants also corresponded with newspapers from within the quarantine station to articulate their grievances, understandings of disease and value as newly arrived settlers. These were, as Haines argues, ‘well-informed, self-selecting, literate individuals’, and they actively engaged with the colonists' critique.24

In sum, I propose that the medical diagnoses of fevers in general, and contagious typhus in particular, relied on the understanding of the voyage as a multi-faceted pathological process that could generate and modify different types of fever. On the other hand, health and morals clearly went hand in hand in this period, and I suggest that the rhetoric that made typhus a moral problem—perhaps because its meaning was often articulated so clearly in the form of newspaper commentary—proved to be a more stable traveller. Historians have emphasised the biopolitical importance of quarantine and public health to modern conceptions of nationhood, citizenship and immigration, particularly in Australia; this article extends these insights back to the early nineteenth century.25 Yet, in so doing, it emphasises not only the importance of quarantine as a border process, but also the importance of the voyage as a pathological event. Ships did not simply transport ‘typhus’ or ‘fever’ from Britain and Ireland to Australia, but actively contributed to a continual production and modification of non-contagious and contagious disease. I specifically respond, therefore, to recent discussions about Peter Baldwin's argument that a state's distance from a disease ‘fount’ acted as a geographically determining factor in shaping quarantine politics.26 I contend that responses to fever and quarantine in 1830s Sydney challenge both our historical understanding of how disease and disease knowledge travelled in the nineteenth century, and the relationship of quarantine to disease, distance and local politics.