While much publicity and research have been devoted to Zaire ebolavirus, the most lethal of the ebolaviruses, the outbreak that ended with the largest number of human EHF cases was caused by Sudan ebolavirus. This outbreak occurred from August 2000 to January 2001 and was centered in the Gulu district of northern Uganda, with spread to two of the country's southern districts through the movement of infected individuals and subsequent secondary contact transmissions (4). In total, there were 425 cases with 224 deaths (53% case fatality). This level of case fatality was similar to that seen for two previous EHF outbreaks associated with Sudan ebolavirus (in 1976 and 1979), in which 53% of 284 cases and 66% of 34 cases had fatal outcomes (6). As has been the case with most EHF epidemics, there was not an established diagnostic laboratory nearby during the Gulu outbreak; thus, a field laboratory was established on-site in rural northern Uganda at a local missionary hospital (St. Mary's Lacor Hospital) for the purpose of identifying acute EHF cases. The single previous attempt to establish a field laboratory in an epidemic setting (in 1976 in Zaire) relied upon an immunofluorescence assay (IFA) for acute case identification, but the results were poor (2, 9, 14). During the Uganda outbreak, an antigen-capture diagnostic assay (16) along with a newly developed nested reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) assay were used, which together proved very effective as field diagnostic tools for the detection of ebolavirus antigen and nucleic acid in patient serum, plasma, and whole blood. During the outbreak, almost 1,800 samples were tested by antigen capture and about 1,100 were tested by RT-PCR. The epidemic represented the first reemergence of Sudan ebolavirus in over 20 years and provided a rare opportunity to collect multiple specimens from patients throughout the course of the disease and thus to gain a better understanding of the clinical virology of Sudan ebolavirus and to meaningfully assess the available diagnostic assays.